Hello, welcome to Overview of Web
and Cloud Development.
When you’re starting out as a Web Developer,
it can be difficult to determine what you
need to learn and what order you should learn
it in.
Understanding how familiar websites are constructed and
delivered to you is a good starting point.
Let’s review the basics of how you interact
with a website.
You launch an internet browser – there are
lots available:
Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Mozilla Firefox,
and Apple Safari are some of the most popular.
The browser has an address bar, into which
you enter a URL, like www.IBM.com.
The browser then contacts the server with
the name and requests the information that
makes up the website.
The server then sends a response, which contains
the data that the client requires to display
the website.
For most websites, the server will return:
HTML, which defines the structure of the page,
but doesn’t look very attractive
CSS, which adds style and flair to the page
and JavaScript, which adds interactivity and
dynamic content.
Content displayed by websites can contain
elements that are either previously stored
on the server (called “static”) or generated
each time they are requested by the client
(called “dynamic”).
Dynamic elements can involve information coming
from other systems and applications, such
as databases.
Most websites contain static and dynamic elements
to provide the best user experience.
Cloud Applications are similar to Websites
in that they request content that a server
returns.
Cloud Apps are built to work seamlessly with
a Cloud-based back-end infrastructure, Cloud-based
data storage and data processing, and other
Cloud services, making them very scalable
and very resilient.
The environment for building websites and
Cloud Applications is divided into two primary
areas:
front-end and back-end.
The front-end deals with everything that happens
at the client-side – everything the user
can see and interact with.
You can choose to specialize in front-end
coding, using HTML, CSS, JavaScript and related
frameworks, libraries, and tools.
The back-end deals with everything that happens
on the server before the code and data are
sent to the client.
The back-end coding usually handles the logic
and functionality that make the website or
app work, and the authentication processes
that keep data secure.
Back-end developers may also work with relational
or noSQL databases, even collaborating with
database administrators in bigger projects.
Full-stack developers have skills, knowledge,
and experience in both front-end and back-end
environments.
Whichever way you choose to specialize, you
will need the appropriate tools to help you work.
The first tool most developers add to their
resources is a code editor.
Developers also need tools to integrate, build,
compile, and debug code.
Integrated Development Environments or IDEs
incorporate some of these additional capabilities
beyond just code editing and make it easier
to build and manage your code.
Good IDEs support multiple languages and integrate
with management and storage tools like Git
and GitHub.
Other useful features are custom extensions
and themes for supporting your working style
and environment.
Examples for code editors and IDEs include
Sublime Text, Atom, Vim, VS Code, Visual Studio,
Eclipse and NetBeans.
In this brief overview, you learned about:
The basic communication between client and
servers.
How websites are built and displayed.
Front-end development is about what happens
on the client side.
Back-end development is about what happens
on the server.
Full-stack development incudes both front-end
and back-end development.
IDEs will help you create and manage your code.